All her invitations without exception, written in
And really you appreciate them less than anyone, and so
And she smiled her ecstatic smile.
And with the familiarity and easy grace peculiar to
Anna Pavlovna almost closed her eyes to indicate that
Anna Pavlovna burst out:
Anna Pavlovna’s hand and for some reason drawing it
As she named the Empress, Anna Pavlovna’s face
Between ourselves’ (and her face assumed its melancholy 
Buonaparte is invincible, and that all Europe is powerless
Chapter I
Empress by her sister,’ was all she said, in a dry and
Empress) and at the same time to console him, so she
England with her commercial spirit will not and cannot
Fedorovna to secure it for the baron.
French families. He is one of the genuine emigres, the
French in which our grandfathers not only spoke but
French, and delivered by a scarlet-liveried footman that
Had you heard?’
He said no more, but expressed his resignation to cruel
In the midst of a conversation on political matters
It was in July, 1805, and the speaker was the wellknown Anna Pavlovna Scherer, maid of honor and
Meinen lately. He is an aide-de-camp of Kutuzov’s and
Montmorencys through the Rohans, one of the best
Novosiltsev’s dispatch? You know everything.’
Pavlovna. ‘You are staying the whole evening, I hope?’ 
Prince Vasili always spoke languidly, like an actor
Prince Vasili did not reply, though, with the quickness
Prince Vasili wished to obtain this post for his son, but
Princess Mary Bolkonskaya.’
She suddenly paused, smiling at her own impetuosity.
She was, as she said, suffering from la grippe; grippe
The prince answered nothing, but she looked at him
The prince bowed to signify his respect and gratitude.
The prince was silent and looked indifferent. But, with
The subdued smile which, though it did not suit her faded
They say she is amazingly beautiful.’
Wednesday. I must put in an appearance there,’ said the
You are so eloquent. Will you give me a cup of tea?’
about to ask was the chief motive of his visit, ‘is it true
accounts is a poor creature.’
again, ‘I am expecting two very interesting men tonight,
and if the prospect of spending an evening with a poor
and noble that God will not forsake him. He will fulfill his
and raising her eyebrows. ‘Two such charming children.
and the time had come for intimate conversation- ‘I often
animation and impulsiveness. To be an enthusiast had
answer did Novosiltsev get? None. The English have not
appointed first secretary at Vienna? The baron by all
as if to show that political and social topics were ended
be your most devoted slave- slafe wigh an f, as a village
become her social vocation and, sometimes even when
become more terrible than ever in the person of this
been sent instead of our dear Wintzingerode you would
before him.... And I don’t believe a word that Hardenburg
being then a new word in St. Petersburg, used only by the
beneath the politeness and affected sympathy of which
breeches, and shoes, and had stars on his breast and a
calm in times like these if one has any feeling?’ said Anna
check the sad current of his thoughts, ‘that Anatole is
children? I don’t speak of Anatole, your youngest. I don’t
clouded over with sadness.
cold, listless tone. ‘What has been decided? They have
considered it necessary, to correct.
considering this information.
contrary, despite her forty years, overflowed with
costing me forty thousand rubles a year? And,’ he went
country. He is the well-known Prince Bolkonski who had
daring to speak he had done of a man recommended to the 
daughter came out everyone has been enraptured by her?
decided that Buonaparte has burnt his boats, and I believe
defect, which she neither wished, nor could, nor
desires the good of mankind. And what have they
devotion and respect mingled with sadness, and this
difference between them.’ He said this smiling in a way
distributed. Why has fate given you two such splendid
do? I see I have frightened you - sit down and tell me all
downwards. ‘Arrange that affair for me and I shall always 
drawing nearer to the prince and smiling amiably at him
eccentric, and a bore. The poor girl is very unhappy. She
elder of mine writes in his reports. She is rich and of good
elite.
entered, wearing an embroidered court uniform, knee
entertainment would have been put off,’ said the prince,
estates of the Buonapartes. But I warn you, if you don’t
expression), ‘he was mentioned at Her Majesty’s and you
faith in! Our good and wonderful sovereign has to
family and that’s all I want.’
family’s behalf that I’ll start my apprenticeship as old
fate by a gesture. Anna Pavlovna meditated.
favorite of the Empress Marya Fedorovna. With these
features, always played round her lips expressed, as in a 
fool, but Anatole is an active one. That is the only
friend’s mind at rest,’ said he without altering his tone,
good ones. And also the Abbe Morio. Do you know that
had only just occurred to him, though the question he was 
has a brother; I think you know him, he married Lise
has refused to evacuate Malta. She wanted to find, and
have both turned out fools. Hippolyte is at least a quiet
have captured the King of Prussia’s consent by assault.
have to bear. That is how I explain it to myself. It can’t be
have to put up with.... Is this princess of yours rich?’
he did not even wish to be believed.
he indicated by a movement of the head that he was
head, and complacently seated himself on the sofa.
helped!’
her hand, presenting to her his bald, scented, and shining
him, he raised the maid of honor’s hand to his lips, kissed
indifference and even irony could be discerned.
infamies and horrors perpetrated by that Antichrist - I
invalid is not too terrible, I shall be very charmed to see
is just a trap. I have faith only in God and the lofty destiny
it, and swung it to and fro as he lay back in his armchair,
know I did all a father could for their education, and they
le Vicomte de Mortemart, who is connected with the
like him,’ she added in a tone admitting of no rejoinder
looking in another direction.
maid.’ 
mania for matchmaking, and though I don’t feel that 
more natural and animated than usual, so that the wrinkles
morning, ran as follows: 
mournful tone.
murderer and villain! We alone must avenge the blood of
my ‘faithful slave,’ as you call yourself! But how do you
natural to a man of importance who had grown old in
neither she nor anyone else had a right to criticize what
nicknamed ‘the King of Prussia.’ He is very clever but
not in the least disconcerted by this reception. He had just
not to disappoint the expectations of those who knew her.
not wish, for war. She is betraying us! Russia alone must
occurred every time she mentioned her illustrious
of memory and perception befitting a man of the world,
of our adored monarch. He will save Europe!’
on after a pause, ‘what will it be in five years, if he goes
on like this?’ Presently he added: ‘That’s what we fathers
others were trying through the Dowager Empress Marya
our Emperor who wants nothing for himself, but only 
patroness. She added that Her Majesty had deigned to
perform the noblest role on earth, and he is so virtuous
perhaps the thing can be arranged. It shall be on your
prince. ‘My daughter is coming for me to take me there.’
profound thinker? He has been received by the Emperor.
promised? Nothing! And what little they have promised
rank and importance, who was the first to arrive at her
really believe he is Antichrist - I will have nothing more
reception. Anna Pavlovna had had a cough for some days.
repeating a stale part. Anna Pavlovna Scherer on the
round his mouth very clearly revealed something
said I lack the bump of paternity.’
said:
save Europe. Our gracious sovereign recognizes his high
says, or Haugwitz either. This famous Prussian neutrality
serene expression on his flat face. He spoke in that refined
she did not feel like it, she became enthusiastic in order
show Baron Funke beaucoup d’estime, and again her face
significantly, awaiting a reply. He frowned.
society and at court. He went up to Anna Pavlovna, kissed
son Anatole?’ she asked. ‘They say old maids have a
spoiled child, a continual consciousness of her charming
still seeks, some secret motive in our actions. What
suddenly assumed an expression of profound and sincere
tell me that this means war, if you still try to defend the
that my children are the bane of my life. It is the cross I
that the Dowager Empress wants Baron Funke to be
that we are ready to burn ours.’
the Empress desired or was pleased with.
the just one.... Whom, I ask you, can we rely on?...
the news.’
the womanly and courtierlike quickness and tact habitual
these festivities and fireworks are becoming wearisome.’
they will not perform! Prussia has always declared that
think how unfairly sometimes the joys of life are
thought, and with the gentle, patronizing intonation
to Lise, young Bolkonski’s wife, this very evening, and
to do with you and you are no longer my friend, no longer
to her, Anna Pavlovna wished both to rebuke him (for
to retire from the army under the late Emperor, and was
understand the Emperor Alexander’s loftiness of soul. She
understand things, but Austria never has wished, and does
understood and cannot understand the self-abnegation of
unexpectedly coarse and unpleasant.
very unhappy with her father. She is a relation of yours,
vocation and crush the hydra of revolution, which has
vocation and will be true to it. That is the one thing I have
weakness in myself as yet,I know a little person who is
were not a father there would be nothing I could reproach
were pitied...’
who, like a wound-up clock, by force of habit said things
will be here tonight.’
words she greeted Prince Vasili Kuragin, a man of high
you don’t deserve to have them.’
you know I am dissatisfied with your younger son?
you tonight between 7 and 10- Annette Scherer.’
you with,’ said Anna Pavlovna, looking up pensively.
‘And the fete at the English ambassador’s? Today is
‘And why are children born to such men as you? If you
‘Attendez,’ said Anna Pavlovna, reflecting, ‘I’ll speak
‘Baron Funke has been recommended to the Dowager
‘But tell me,’ he added with studied carelessness as if it
‘Can one be well while suffering morally? Can one be
‘Do you know,’ he said at last, evidently unable to
‘Don’t joke; I mean to have a serious talk with you. Do
‘Don’t tease! Well, and what has been decided about
‘First of all, dear friend, tell me how you are. Set your
‘Have you never thought of marrying your prodigal
‘Heavens! what a virulent attack!’ replied the prince,
‘Her father is very rich and stingy. He lives in the
‘I am your faithful slave and to you alone I can confess
‘I can’t help it,’ said the prince. ‘Lavater would have
‘I often think,’ she continued after a short pause,
‘I shall be delighted to meet them,’ said the prince.
‘I think,’ said the prince with a smile, ‘that if you had
‘I thought today’s fete had been canceled. I confess all
‘If they had known that you wished it, the
‘If you have nothing better to do, Count [or Prince],
‘In a moment. A propos,’ she added, becoming calm
‘Listen, dear Annette,’ said the prince, suddenly taking
‘Now about your family. Do you know that since your
‘Oh, don’t speak to me of Austria. Perhaps I don’t
‘Well, Prince, so Genoa and Lucca are now just family
‘What can one say about it?’ replied the prince in a
‘What would you have me do?’ he said at last. ‘You
